# RubyGems: Locating and Using Libraries Lesson

## Overview

In programming a Library refers to a stand-alone package of code that is designed to serve some specific purpose. Libraries can be integrated with a larger code base to add functionality. Some examples of Libraries could be:

- Currency conversions
- Basic string manipulation
- Web service API

These are just examples, a library could really include anything.

Ruby gems are like little (or sometimes BIG) bundles of Ruby. They can add any and all code to your ruby toolkit. Gems are ruby libraries wrapped up in a little package for ease of use, installation, consistency, collaboration, and sharing. After a gem is created, it can be used in many different applications and is commonly hosted on a remote server to share and collaborate with the world. Most commonly gems are hosted on the rubygems.org website, but it is possible to host and download gems from many other services and private servers.

If you are looking for specific functionality, say latitude/longitudes to postal code conversions, it's very likely that someone has needed the same functionality, created it, and hosted the gem. A great way to find resources is using the rubygems.org search functionality or using any search engine, for example: "lat long to postal code gem". Let's explore this and a couple other libraries. We'll go over how to find, install, use, and remove them.

## Finding Ruby Gems

Searching the rubygems.org website is a great way to find a gem if you already know the name of the gem you want to use. Since we only know the functionality we would like to use, let's start with a search engine. Try "lat long to postal code gem", as of right now the gem "geocoder" is the first result. And it looks what we want. This is a link to a [GitHub](https://github.com/alexreisner/geocoder) page, although the compiled ruby gem is hosted on rubygems.org, most gems also have a github repo which is typically where you will explore the basic documentation of a gem. In the github page we can see quite a bit of very useful information. Things to look for:

- Last commit: It's not always best to use gems that haven't been updated in the past year. As dependencies progress it is likely the gem will become outdated and possibly unstable.
- Documentation: If a gem doesn't have a README (other than the stock README generated by a framework), the gem may still be in active development or produced without the intention of maintaining it for the public.
- Owner: If the github user you are viewing differs from the creator of the gem, the repo you are viewing may be a fork of the original repo. Forks may contain changes that are not documented and may not be maintained. In this case, just click on the link containing the name of the repo and the original owner.

You can look at some additional data about the most recent public version of a gem on rubygems.org. Visit [Geocoder on RubyGems.org](https://rubygems.org/gems/geocoder), here you will see links to the contributors, homepage, documentation, as well as the current and recent past versions.

## Installing Ruby Gems

Typically to install a gem all we need to do is `gem install GEMNAME`, let's install `Geocoder` 

    gem install geocoder
    
If a gem requires any addition configuration for proper installation the GitHub page will should have the documented in an easy to understand way. 

By default the most recent version of a gem will be installed, sometimes a version of a gem is released with a bug or an incompatibility with another library we may be using. In this case we would want to install a different version. This can be done using the `-v` option while installing a gem.

    gem install geocoder -v 1.1.8
    
Gem installtion has many other options, run `gem install -h` to see all installation options.

## Using Ruby Gems

We can see the basic usage of the Geocoder gem directly on the GitHub page. Give it a try:

    irb
    require 'geocoder' # => true 
    result = Geocoder.search("47.734145,-122.235776") # => [#<Geocoder::Result::Google:0x007fc5441cc968 @data=...
    result.first.data["formatted_address"] # => "7831 Northeast 146th Street, Kenmore, WA 98028, USA" 
    
There we have it. A postal code (and more!) from a latitude/longitude. Pretty simple. Next use the `Geocoder` gem to find your location based on your current IP address. Hint: Run `ifconfig | grep "inet " | grep -v 127.0.0.1` in the Terminal, the last entry is your current IP Address

After, your have played with the `Geocoder` gem try using a gem on your own. Think of some functionality that you think you'd like to use. If you can't think of any here are a few ideas:

- Generating Lorem Ipsum (and fake names) [Faker](https://github.com/stympy/faker)
- Currency Conversion (and formatting) [Money](https://github.com/RubyMoney/money)
- Weather Conditions [WeatherUnderground](http://github.com/sdague/weather-underground.rb)
- Easy HTTP Request [HTTParty](https://www.google.com/search?client=safari&rls=en&q=httparty&ie=UTF-8&oe=UTF-8)

After choosing a gem follow the instructions on the GitHub page, typically just `gem install GEMNAME`, but some additional configuration may be needed depending on the gem. Next use the gem directly in `irb`. Refer to the documentation for basic usage.

## Removing Ruby Gems

Removing gems is easy. Just `gem uninstall GEMNAME`. Go ahead and remove the gem that you've just installed.